---
layout: post
title:  "Genetics in medicine 12: Blood lipids and myocardial infarction"
date:   2015-04-24 12:01:00
author: ericminikel
tag: genetics-228
location: Cambridge, MA
summary200: "A lecture by Sekar Kathiresan on using human genetics to validate drug targets for heart disease."
---

*These are my notes from week 12 of Harvard's [Genetics 228: Genetics in Medicine from Bench to Bedside](http://www2.massgeneral.org/bbs/gen228/gen228_syllabus_material.asp) course, held on April 24, 2015. Featuring a lecture by [Sekar Kathiresan](http://www.kathiresanlab.org/about-sek/).*

### Journal club: *Exome sequencing, ANGPTL3 mutations, and familial combined hypolipidemia* [[Musunuru 2010]]

Familial hypobetalipoproteinemia is associated with very low (<5<sup>th</sup> percentile) levels of ApoB and LDL cholesterol. The most common cause is loss-of-function mutations in *APOB*. In this paper, they had a pedigree with hypobetalipoproteinemia that was negative for *APOB* mutations, so they undertook exome sequencing to find the cause, and found compound heterozygous nonsense mutations (S17X and E129X) in *ANGPTL1*. This was back in 2010 when there had only been a single digit number of instances where exome sequencing had identified a new disease gene, so just the fact that they successfully used this approach was still pretty novel.

Reading the paper is a real throwback - those were the days when you could still just throw out any variant that was present in dbSNP! That approach began to be phased out in favor of allele frequency filters the following year [[Bamshad 2011]]. Also, back then exome sequencing was super expensive, so instead of sequencing all four affecteds right off the bat, they sequenced two of them and then went back and Sangered the candidate causal variants in the other affecteds. They also Sanger sequenced the unaffected carriers, which confirmed the two variants were in *trans* to each other.

This family had not only low LDL but also low HDL. Interestingly, the LDL phenotype was codominant (hets had intermediate LDL levels) while the HDL phenotype was purely recessive (hets had wild-type HDL levels).

For validation they also went back and Sanger sequenced the gene in people from the Dallas Heart Study who had been phenotyped for LDL levels. They found 12 people heterozygous for 6 different frameshift variants in *ANGPTL3*, and these 12 people tended to have lower LDL than wild-type individuals (median 77.5 mg/dl vs. 104, p = 0.03).

### [Sekar Kathiresan](http://www.kathiresanlab.org/about-sek/): Using human genetics to validate drug targets in heart disease

Myocardial infarction (MI; heart attack) is the leading cause of death both in the U.S. and worldwide. It occurs when athersclerotic plaques build up on artery walls until a thrombus (blockage of red blood cells) occurs. If the heart tissue downstream of that blockage then goes without blood supply for 20 minutes, it will die. The death of heart tissue is called a heart attack.

Until statins, there was no medication for high LDL. If you had high LDL (the population average in the U.S. is 130 mg/dL and the 95th percentile is 190 mg/dL), your doctor would simply tell you to eat better and exercise more. In the late 1980s, the first statin was approved. Statins underwent clinical trials for progressively lower risk groups - for instance, they were investigated for preventing a second heart attack in people who had already had one, and only later was there a trial to prevent a first heart attack. It was eventually shown that statins both lower LDL and lower heart attack risk, but it still took years before it was firmly established that *all* means of lowering LDL also lower heart attack risk. 

While there have been great advances in treating LDL and preventing heart attack, it is believed there are still undisovered genetic factors and pathways influencing risk. If your mother or father had early onset cardiovascular disease, you have about a 3x higher risk of heart attack [[Lloyd-Jones 2004]]. This odds ratio is fairly robust to controlling for environmental factors, suggesting much of the risk is genetic.

The first study establishing a correlation between serum cholesterol levels and subsequent risk of heart attack was the Framingham Heart Study [[Kannel 1961]]. The title of the study was *Factors of risk in the development of coronary heart disease--six year follow-up experience* and it is credited with establishing the term "risk factor" in the English vocabulary. We later learned that the serum cholesterol association in that study needs to be separated into correlations with three separate forms of cholesterol that circulate in the blood. LDL cholesterol is positively correlated with heart attack risk, HDL is negatively correlated, and triglyceride is positively correlated. The triglyceride correlation disappears if you control for certain other factors, whereas the other two correlations are robust to covariates [[Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration 2009]]. All three are tested on clinical blood lipid panels, and doctors tend to tell patients that LDL is "bad" cholesterol, HDL is "good" cholesterol, and that it is not clear whether triglyceride is important.

The Framingham Heart Study, however, was purely observational, and for decades thereafter, it was difficult to determine whether high LDL *caused* high heart attack risk, or whether high HDL *caused* low heart attack risk. For risk prediction - determining which people are at high risk and could benefit from an intervention - it actually doesn't matter if your classifier is causal or merely correlated. But it matters a lot for therapy - drugging a target will only alter the outcome if the target is causal.

You can try to distinguish causality from correlation is a randomized controlled trial. Randomize people into two groups, treat them with an intervention, measure changes in the biomarker, and measure changes in the clinical outcome. The problem is that you can't afford to do a randomized trial for every possible variable that might affect the clinical outcome. This is where genetics can come in. In **Mendelian randomization** [see [Hingorani & Humphries 2005]] you ask whether genetic variants that affect the biomarker also affect the clinical outcome. Human genetics offers two great advantages:

1. The genome is unmodified by the disease process, which minimizes reverse causality
2. Alleles are randomized at meiosis, which minimizes confounders

The biggest limitation of Mendelian randomization is that it relies on an assumption of no pleiotropy [[Pickrell 2015]]. Pleiotropy is when a genetic variant affects more than one trait. It is basically impossible to prove that there is no pleiotropy. For instance, in the studies of [*PCKS9*](/2014/11/19/primer-on-pcsk9-genetics/) they showed that the two groups (R46L hets and wild-type people) were not significantly different in terms of smoking, diabetes, etc. [[Cohen 2006], [Kathiresan 2008]] but you never know whether there is some other variable you haven't thought of.

One way to try to get around this limitation is to try to show that the effect size is what would be expected based on the biomarker. For *PCSK9* R46L hets, LDL is reduced by 21 mg/dL, a reduction which according to the observational correlation between LDL and heart attack would predict an odds ratio of 0.80 for heart attack. And indeed, the genetics says that R46L hets have about an odds ratio of 0.72 for heart attack.

Although the possibility of pleiotropy confounds positive results from Mendelian randomization, it does not confound the interpretation of negative results. The *LIPG* N396S variant raises HDL by 6 mg/dL, which - again, based on observational correlation between HDL and heart attack - would be predicted to lower heart attack risk. Yet people with this variant had unaltered risk of heart attack [[Voight & Peloso 2012]]. And sure enough, a clinical trial of an HDL-raising drug candidate, dalcetrapib, raised HDL from about 42 mg/dL to about 55 mg/dL in treated individuals yet had no effect whatsoever on heart attack risk [[Schwartz 2012]]. It now appears that HDL is simply a non-causal marker of heart disease risk - which means it can still be useful for doctors to measure, it's just not a good drug target. It turns out that HDL is correlated with "everything good" - exercise, good diet, etc.

It has proven very difficult to figure out whether triglycerides are causally associated with heart attack risk using Mendelian randomization, because every genetic variant so far discovered that affects TG levels *also* affects either LDL, HDL, or both. One approach that Sek and collaborators took was to find a very large number of common variants associated with TG, and then ask whether the effect size of each SNP on TG was correlated with its effect size on heart attack [[Do & Willer 2013]]. A SNP's odds ratio for LDL is correlated with its odds ratio for heart attack, but its odds ratio for HDL is *not* correlated with its odds ratio for heart attack. It turns out that the odds ratio for TG *is* correlated with odds ratio for heart attack, indicating that triglycerides probably are indeed causal for heart attack risk.

Dr. Kathiresan is of the view that we will have greater success in developing drugs if we focus our efforts on targets for which human genetics provides prospective validation [[Plenge 2013]]. His group is therefore focused on using human genetics to provide validation for additional targets for treating LDL and heart disease risk. Today there are two classes of drug demonstrated to reduce risk of first heart attack: aspirin and statins. They reduce risk by ~15% and ~25% respectively. The evidence for aspirin is mainly in older people; there is little evidence that it reduces first heart attack risk in young people. Monoclonal antibodies against PCSK9 are likely to be approved this summer.

Dr. Kathiresan has recently led two efforts which have validated drug targets using human genetics.

He ahs demonstrated that people heterozygous for LoF mutations in *NPC1L1* (which encodes a transporter responsible for uptake of dietary cholesterol) have reduced LDL and reduced heart disease risk, providing validation for the drug ezetimibe [[Myocardial Infarction Genetics Consortium 2014]]. The effect size of a single LoF allele of *NPC1L1* is to reduce LDL by 12 mg/dL and heart attack risk by 53%. One week after the genetic results came out, the results of a clinical trial of ezetimibe were published [[Blazing 2014]]. At 10 mg/day, ezetimibe reduced LDL by 15 mg/dL, and after 6 years, it had reduced heart attack risk by 6%. The fact that the heart attack risk benefit of ezetimibe was far, far smaller than the benefit from an LoF allele of *NPC1L1* is hypothesized to be due to the cumulative protective effects of a whole lifetime of reduced LDL as opposed to only 6 years of reduced LDL.

> You can never be too rich or have too low an LDL.
> 
> &mdash; Eugene Braunwald, [quoted here](https://twitter.com/skathire/status/534703846086684672)

More recently, it has been discovered that four different *APOC3* LoF mutations, with a cumulative allele frequency of 1 in 150 in the United States, are associated with 39% reduction of triglycerides and 40% reduction in heart attack risk [[TG and HDL Working Group 2014]]. In a fat challenge test (having volunteers suddenly eat 100 grams of fat), people with an *APOC3* LoF mutation experience less of an increase in blood triglycerides [[Pollin 2008]]. There is already one drug in the pipeline - Isis Pharmaceuticals has an antisense oligonucleotide against *APOC3* that has already been tested in human volunteers [[Graham 2013]].

[Musunuru 2010]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20942659 "Musunuru K, Pirruccello JP, Do R, Peloso GM, Guiducci C, Sougnez C, Garimella  KV, Fisher S, Abreu J, Barry AJ, Fennell T, Banks E, Ambrogio L, Cibulskis K, Kernytsky A, Gonzalez E, Rudzicz N, Engert JC, DePristo MA, Daly MJ, Cohen JC, Hobbs HH, Altshuler D, Schonfeld G, Gabriel SB, Yue P, Kathiresan S. Exome sequencing, ANGPTL3 mutations, and familial combined hypolipidemia. N Engl J Med. 2010 Dec 2;363(23):2220-7. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1002926. Epub 2010 Oct 13. PubMed PMID: 20942659; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3008575."

[Bamshad 2011]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21946919 "Bamshad MJ, Ng SB, Bigham AW, Tabor HK, Emond MJ, Nickerson DA, Shendure J. Exome sequencing as a tool for Mendelian disease gene discovery. Nat Rev Genet. 2011 Sep 27;12(11):745-55. doi: 10.1038/nrg3031. Review. PubMed PMID: 21946919."

[Lloyd-Jones 2004]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15138242 "Lloyd-Jones DM, Nam BH, D'Agostino RB Sr, Levy D, Murabito JM, Wang TJ, Wilson PW, O'Donnell CJ. Parental cardiovascular disease as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease in middle-aged adults: a prospective study of parents and  offspring. JAMA. 2004 May 12;291(18):2204-11. PubMed PMID: 15138242."

[Kannel 1961]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/13751193 "KANNEL WB, DAWBER TR, KAGAN A, REVOTSKIE N, STOKES J 3rd. Factors of risk in the development of coronary heart disease--six year follow-up experience. The Framingham Study. Ann Intern Med. 1961 Jul;55:33-50. PubMed PMID: 13751193."

[Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration 2009]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19622820/ "Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration, Erqou S, Kaptoge S, Perry PL, Di Angelantonio E, Thompson A, White IR, Marcovina SM, Collins R, Thompson SG, Danesh J. Lipoprotein(a) concentration and the risk of coronary heart disease, stroke, and nonvascular mortality. JAMA. 2009 Jul 22;302(4):412-23. doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.1063. Review. PubMed PMID: 19622820; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3272390."

[Hingorani & Humphries 2005]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16325682 "Hingorani A, Humphries S. Nature's randomised trials. Lancet. 2005 Dec 3;366(9501):1906-8. PubMed PMID: 16325682."

[Pickrell 2015]: http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2015/04/16/018150 "Fulfilling the promise of Mendelian randomization. Joseph Pickrell. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/018150"

[Voight & Peloso 2012]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22607825/ "Voight BF, Peloso GM, Orho-Melander M, Frikke-Schmidt R, Barbalic M, Jensen MK, Hindy G, Hólm H, Ding EL, Johnson T, Schunkert H, Samani NJ, Clarke R, Hopewell JC, Thompson JF, Li M, Thorleifsson G, Newton-Cheh C, Musunuru K, Pirruccello JP, Saleheen D, Chen L, Stewart A, Schillert A, Thorsteinsdottir U, Thorgeirsson G, Anand S, Engert JC, Morgan T, Spertus J, Stoll M, Berger K, Martinelli N, Girelli D, McKeown PP, Patterson CC, Epstein SE, Devaney J, Burnett MS, Mooser V, Ripatti S, Surakka I, Nieminen MS, Sinisalo J, Lokki ML, Perola M,  Havulinna A, de Faire U, Gigante B, Ingelsson E, Zeller T, Wild P, de Bakker PI,  Klungel OH, Maitland-van der Zee AH, Peters BJ, de Boer A, Grobbee DE, Kamphuisen PW, Deneer VH, Elbers CC, Onland-Moret NC, Hofker MH, Wijmenga C, Verschuren WM,  Boer JM, van der Schouw YT, Rasheed A, Frossard P, Demissie S, Willer C, Do R, Ordovas JM, Abecasis GR, Boehnke M, Mohlke KL, Daly MJ, Guiducci C, Burtt NP, Surti A, Gonzalez E, Purcell S, Gabriel S, Marrugat J, Peden J, Erdmann J, Diemert P, Willenborg C, König IR, Fischer M, Hengstenberg C, Ziegler A, Buysschaert I, Lambrechts D, Van de Werf F, Fox KA, El Mokhtari NE, Rubin D, Schrezenmeir J, Schreiber S, Schäfer A, Danesh J, Blankenberg S, Roberts R, McPherson R, Watkins H, Hall AS, Overvad K, Rimm E, Boerwinkle E, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Cupples LA, Reilly MP, Melander O, Mannucci PM, Ardissino D, Siscovick D, Elosua R, Stefansson K, O'Donnell CJ, Salomaa V, Rader DJ, Peltonen L, Schwartz SM, Altshuler D, Kathiresan S. Plasma HDL cholesterol and risk of myocardial infarction: a mendelian randomisation study. Lancet. 2012 Aug 11;380(9841):572-80. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60312-2. Epub 2012 May 17. Erratum in: Lancet. 2012 Aug 11;380(9841):564. PubMed PMID: 22607825; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3419820."

[Schwartz 2012]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23126252 "Schwartz GG, Olsson AG, Abt M, Ballantyne CM, Barter PJ, Brumm J, Chaitman BR, Holme IM, Kallend D, Leiter LA, Leitersdorf E, McMurray JJ, Mundl H, Nicholls SJ, Shah PK, Tardif JC, Wright RS; dal-OUTCOMES Investigators. Effects of dalcetrapib in patients with a recent acute coronary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2012 Nov 29;367(22):2089-99. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1206797. Epub 2012 Nov 5. PubMed PMID: 23126252."

[Do & Willer 2013]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24097064/ "Do R, Willer CJ, Schmidt EM, Sengupta S, Gao C, Peloso GM, Gustafsson S, Kanoni S, Ganna A, Chen J, Buchkovich ML, Mora S, Beckmann JS, Bragg-Gresham JL,  Chang HY, Demirkan A, Den Hertog HM, Donnelly LA, Ehret GB, Esko T, Feitosa MF, Ferreira T, Fischer K, Fontanillas P, Fraser RM, Freitag DF, Gurdasani D, Heikkilä K, Hyppönen E, Isaacs A, Jackson AU, Johansson A, Johnson T, Kaakinen M, Kettunen J, Kleber ME, Li X, Luan J, Lyytikäinen LP, Magnusson PK, Mangino M, Mihailov E, Montasser ME, Müller-Nurasyid M, Nolte IM, O'Connell JR, Palmer CD, Perola M, Petersen AK, Sanna S, Saxena R, Service SK, Shah S, Shungin D, Sidore C, Song C, Strawbridge RJ, Surakka I, Tanaka T, Teslovich TM, Thorleifsson G, Van den Herik EG, Voight BF, Volcik KA, Waite LL, Wong A, Wu Y, Zhang W, Absher D, Asiki G, Barroso I, Been LF, Bolton JL, Bonnycastle LL, Brambilla P, Burnett MS,  Cesana G, Dimitriou M, Doney AS, Döring A, Elliott P, Epstein SE, Eyjolfsson GI,  Gigante B, Goodarzi MO, Grallert H, Gravito ML, Groves CJ, Hallmans G, Hartikainen AL, Hayward C, Hernandez D, Hicks AA, Holm H, Hung YJ, Illig T, Jones MR, Kaleebu P, Kastelein JJ, Khaw KT, Kim E, Klopp N, Komulainen P, Kumari M, Langenberg C, Lehtimäki T, Lin SY, Lindström J, Loos RJ, Mach F, McArdle WL, Meisinger C, Mitchell BD, Müller G, Nagaraja R, Narisu N, Nieminen TV, Nsubuga RN, Olafsson I, Ong KK, Palotie A, Papamarkou T, Pomilla C, Pouta A, Rader DJ, Reilly MP, Ridker PM, ...m BO, Boomsma DI, Borecki IB, Bornstein SR, Bovet P, Burnier M, Campbell H, Chakravarti A, Chambers JC, Chen YD, Collins  FS, Cooper RS, Danesh J, Dedoussis G, de Faire U, Feranil AB, Ferrières J, Ferrucci L, Freimer NB, Gieger C, Groop LC, Gudnason V, Gyllensten U, Hamsten A,  Harris TB, Hingorani A, Hirschhorn JN, Hofman A, Hovingh GK, Hsiung CA, Humphries SE, Hunt SC, Hveem K, Iribarren C, Järvelin MR, Jula A, Kähönen M, Kaprio J, Kesäniemi A, Kivimaki M, Kooner JS, Koudstaal PJ, Krauss..."

[Kathiresan 2008]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18499582 "Kathiresan S; Myocardial Infarction Genetics Consortium. A PCSK9 missense variant associated with a reduced risk of early-onset myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2008 May 22;358(21):2299-300. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc0707445. PubMed PMID: 18499582."

[Cohen 2006]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16554528 "Cohen JC, Boerwinkle E, Mosley TH Jr, Hobbs HH. Sequence variations in PCSK9,  low LDL, and protection against coronary heart disease. N Engl J Med. 2006 Mar 23;354(12):1264-72. PubMed PMID: 16554528."

[Plenge 2013]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23868113 "Plenge RM, Scolnick EM, Altshuler D. Validating therapeutic targets through human genetics. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2013 Aug;12(8):581-94. doi: 10.1038/nrd4051. Epub 2013 Jul 19. Review. PubMed PMID: 23868113."

[Myocardial Infarction Genetics Consortium 2014]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25390462 "Myocardial Infarction Genetics Consortium Investigators, Stitziel NO, Won HH,  Morrison AC, Peloso GM, Do R, Lange LA, Fontanillas P, Gupta N, Duga S, Goel A, Farrall M, Saleheen D, Ferrario P, König I, Asselta R, Merlini PA, Marziliano N,  Notarangelo MF, Schick U, Auer P, Assimes TL, Reilly M, Wilensky R, Rader DJ, Hovingh GK, Meitinger T, Kessler T, Kastrati A, Laugwitz KL, Siscovick D, Rotter  JI, Hazen SL, Tracy R, Cresci S, Spertus J, Jackson R, Schwartz SM, Natarajan P,  Crosby J, Muzny D, Ballantyne C, Rich SS, O'Donnell CJ, Abecasis G, Sunyaev S, Nickerson DA, Buring JE, Ridker PM, Chasman DI, Austin E, Ye Z, Kullo IJ, Weeke PE, Shaffer CM, Bastarache LA, Denny JC, Roden DM, Palmer C, Deloukas P, Lin DY,  Tang ZZ, Erdmann J, Schunkert H, Danesh J, Marrugat J, Elosua R, Ardissino D, McPherson R, Watkins H, Reiner AP, Wilson JG, Altshuler D, Gibbs RA, Lander ES, Boerwinkle E, Gabriel S, Kathiresan S. Inactivating mutations in NPC1L1 and protection from coronary heart disease. N Engl J Med. 2014 Nov 27;371(22):2072-82. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1405386. Epub 2014 Nov 12. PubMed PMID: 25390462; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4335708."

[Blazing 2014]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25066560 "Blazing MA, Giugliano RP, Cannon CP, Musliner TA, Tershakovec AM, White JA, Reist C, McCagg A, Braunwald E, Califf RM. Evaluating cardiovascular event reduction with ezetimibe as an adjunct to simvastatin in 18,144 patients after acute coronary syndromes: final baseline characteristics of the IMPROVE-IT study  population. Am Heart J. 2014 Aug;168(2):205-12.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2014.05.004. Epub 2014 May 15. PubMed PMID: 25066560."

[Graham 2013]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23542898 "Graham MJ, Lee RG, Bell TA 3rd, Fu W, Mullick AE, Alexander VJ, Singleton W, Viney N, Geary R, Su J, Baker BF, Burkey J, Crooke ST, Crooke RM. Antisense oligonucleotide inhibition of apolipoprotein C-III reduces plasma triglycerides in rodents, nonhuman primates, and humans. Circ Res. 2013 May 24;112(11):1479-90. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.300367. Epub 2013 Mar 29. PubMed PMID: 23542898."

[TG and HDL Working Group 2014]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24941081 "TG and HDL Working Group of the Exome Sequencing Project, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Crosby J, Peloso GM, Auer PL, Crosslin DR, Stitziel NO, Lange LA, Lu Y, Tang ZZ, Zhang H, Hindy G, Masca N, Stirrups K, Kanoni S, Do  R, Jun G, Hu Y, Kang HM, Xue C, Goel A, Farrall M, Duga S, Merlini PA, Asselta R, Girelli D, Olivieri O, Martinelli N, Yin W, Reilly D, Speliotes E, Fox CS, Hveem  K, Holmen OL, Nikpay M, Farlow DN, Assimes TL, Franceschini N, Robinson J, North  KE, Martin LW, DePristo M, Gupta N, Escher SA, Jansson JH, Van Zuydam N, Palmer CN, Wareham N, Koch W, Meitinger T, Peters A, Lieb W, Erbel R, Konig IR, Kruppa J, Degenhardt F, Gottesman O, Bottinger EP, O'Donnell CJ, Psaty BM, Ballantyne CM, Abecasis G, Ordovas JM, Melander O, Watkins H, Orho-Melander M, Ardissino D,  Loos RJ, McPherson R, Willer CJ, Erdmann J, Hall AS, Samani NJ, Deloukas P, Schunkert H, Wilson JG, Kooperberg C, Rich SS, Tracy RP, Lin DY, Altshuler D, Gabriel S, Nickerson DA, Jarvik GP, Cupples LA, Reiner AP, Boerwinkle E, Kathiresan S. Loss-of-function mutations in APOC3, triglycerides, and coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2014 Jul 3;371(1):22-31. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1307095. Epub  2014 Jun 18. PubMed PMID: 24941081; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4180269."

[Pollin 2008]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19074352/ "Pollin TI, Damcott CM, Shen H, Ott SH, Shelton J, Horenstein RB, Post W, McLenithan JC, Bielak LF, Peyser PA, Mitchell BD, Miller M, O'Connell JR, Shuldiner AR. A null mutation in human APOC3 confers a favorable plasma lipid profile and apparent cardioprotection. Science. 2008 Dec 12;322(5908):1702-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1161524. PubMed PMID: 19074352; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2673993."


