---
layout: post
title:  "Developments and challenges in degradation-targeting chimeras"
date:   2019-09-12 12:01:00
author: ericminikel
location: Cambridge, MA
thumb120: http://www.cureffi.org/media/2019/09/degrader-thumbnail.png
summary200: "PROTACs, ENDTACs, LYTACs: bifunctional molecules that bring about destruction of your protein of interest. What is new and what are the current limitations?"
---

Back in 2015, I [blogged about](/2015/08/24/thalidomides-renaissance/) the buzz in the chemical biology world over targeted protein degradation: the use of chimeric molecules that bind both your protein of interest (POI) and something capable of degrading that protein, and bring them into chemically induced proximity to cause degradation to occur. While the concept has been around for years [[Sakamoto 2001]], it garnered a new level of attention thanks to the discovery of the mechanism of action of thalidomide, whose phthalimide chemical group turns out to bind the E3 ubiquitin ligase cereblon (*CRBN*).

In the years since then, this area of research has exploded. It turns out there are loads of different proteins, complexes, and pathways that target things for degradation, and that are operative in various cellular compartments, and for which ligands either existed or are now being discovered. This week I sat down to try to update my understanding of the literature on this topic, and identified no fewer than nine different systems that have been reported &mdash; and I am by no means certain this list is complete:

| degradation mediator | cellular compartments | description of system | reference |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| Skp1-cullin-F box complex containing Hrt1 (*SKP1*, *CUL1*, *RBX1*) | cytosol | ovalicin, linker, peptide ligand of POI | [Sakamoto 2001] | 
| chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) pathway | cytosol | cell membrane-penetrating domain (CMPD), CMA-targeting peptide motif, peptide ligand of POI | [Fan 2014] |
| cereblon (*CRBN*) | cytosol | phthalimide, linker, small molecule POI binder | [Winter 2015], [Lu 2015], [Nabet 2018] |
| androgen receptor (*AR*) | ER, membrane | adamantane, linker, covalent small molecule POI binder | [Gustafson 2015] |
| von Hippel-Lindau-cullin-RING ligase complex (*VHL*) | cytosol | small molecule VHL binder, linker, small molecule POI binder | [Bondeson 2015] |
| inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) cIAP1, XIAP (*BIRC2*, *XIAP*) | cytosol | bestatin methyl-ester, linker, small molecule POI binder | [Naito 2019] |
| decoy GPCR receptor CXCR7 (*ACKR3*) | secreted | small molecule CXCR7 ligand, linker, small molecule POI binder | [Nalawansha 2019] |
| CI-M6PR (*IGF2R*) | secreted, membrane-bound | poly-(mannose-6-phosphate), antibody to POI | [Banik 2019] |
| DCAF16 (*DCAF16*) | nucleus | small molecule DCAF16 binder, linker, small molecule POI binder | [Zhang 2019] |

Above I have summarized these studies in terms of the protein machinery responsible for degradation, the cellular compartment(s) in which it is active, a description of the chimeric molecule system needed to induce degradation, and references. I only included systems that rely solely on the exogenous addition of a single chimeric molecule &mdash; this list does not even touch on the numerous systems that rely on transfection of cells to express a special construct, such as the "Trim-Away" system using *TRIM21* [[Clift 2017]], or the auxin-inducible degron (AID) system [[Holland 2012]].

My reason for interest in all this is, of course, the hope that some such system could be leveraged to degrade prion protein (PrP) in the brain. We have [excellent evidence](/2018/07/10/antisense-part-i-the-basics/) that lowering PrP will be therapeutically beneficial in prion disease, but, like many of the targets people have worked on in these "degrader" studies cited above, just binding the protein might not be enough &mdash; ideally, the protein needs to not be present.

With that framing and motivation, where does the recent progress in development of "degrader" systems put us?

Whereas the first reported "degrader" systems were for cytosolic proteins, it is great news that we are finally seeing more diversity of cellular compartments: three systems cited above are operative in the ER or extracellular space, including one I blogged about [previously](/2015/08/24/thalidomides-renaissance/) [[Gustafson 2015]] as well as the recently reported LYTAC [[Banik 2019]] and ENDTAC [[Nalawansha 2019]] systems. It is worth discussing these two new systems in a bit more detail.

The LYTAC system [[Banik 2019]], excitingly, was shown to work not only on secreted proteins, but also on membrane-bound proteins such as EGFR. It relies on hijacking an endogenous system for degradation of glycosylated proteins. CI-M6PR's native function is to bind mannose-6-phosphate (M6P), which is a glycan mark that cells use to target proteins for degradation. Prior work in delivery of enzyme replacement therapies had established that conjugation of a cargo to M6P can allow internalization by this receptor, but it hadn't been used for targeted degradation before. Certain cargo internalized by CI-M6PR, such as PD-L1 (*CD274*) can often return to the cell surface through chaperone-mediated recycling, but they showed that this system actually overrides such recycling and can achieve up to 50% degradation of PD-L1. The so-called LYTAC (lysosome-targeting chimera) molecules are antibodies to a target protein, covalently attached to a 20- or 90-mer of M6P. Thus, the resulting molecule must be quite large, well over 100 kDa.

In contrast, the ENDTAC system [[Nalawansha 2019]] relies on a (relatively) small molecule. They used the recently developed small molecule CXCR7 ligands VUF11403 and VUF11207 [[Wijtmans 2012]], and added a linker and then a chloroalkane moiety. Chloroalkane is a ligand for HaloTag7, and they expressed a GFP-HaloTag7 fusion protein as an artificial proof-of-concept system. No endogenous proteins were targeted in this paper, but they demonstrated clear uptake and reduction of the secreted GFP fusion protein at concentrations of ENDTAC as low as 500 nM. With the CXCR7 ligand, linker, and POI ligand, the overall ENDTAC molecule is not tiny, but is far smaller than the antibody or peptide-based systems listed up top. *Update 2020-01-29: the ENDTAC paper [has now been retracted](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acscentsci.0c00021), as apparently the original experiments did not replicate.*

All of these studies are exciting as proofs of principle, and I am excited to see the arsenal of degradation systems continue to grow. That said, there are several reasons why applying such a system to PrP is still a relatively distant dream.

1. **Expression**. In order to degrade your protein of interest in the disease-relevant tissue, the degradation-mediating protein or complex has to be expressed and active in that tissue. This can't be taken for granted. The androgen receptor *AR*, used in the endoplasmic reticulum-based targeting system mentioned above [[Gustafson 2015]] is expresed [only in the testis](https://gtexportal.org/home/gene/AR). *IGF2R* and *ACKR3*, the degraders used in the LYTAC and ENDTAC systems reespectively, [both](https://gtexportal.org/home/gene/IGF2R) [have](https://gtexportal.org/home/gene/ACKR3) relatively low brain expression.
2. **Delivery**. Because we need to reach the brain (the whole brain) to treat prion disease, drug delivery may be our biggest challenge. Many of the systems listed above rely on antibodies, peptides, and/or sugar polymers, pushing their overall size into the kilodaltons or even hundreds of kilodaltons. That means these exact systems, at least as currently described, might not be applicable to brain diseases. While there are of course those who argue that antibodies do cross the blood brain barrier in some appreciable quantity, they appear not do so in sufficient abundance to treat prion disease [[White 2003]]. And I have yet to see any good data regarding the distribution across a large brain of antibodies or proteins delivered intrathecally, into the cerebrospinal fluid. Therefore, I expect that any PrP-targeting degrader system would have to be a small molecule in order to be useful. Which brings us to the final two problems.
3. **Need for POI binder**. Finding small molecule ligands of PrP is really hard! No validated, monovalent binders currently exist, and as our research scientist Andrew Reidenbach presented at [Prion2019](/2019/05/23/prion2019-day-2-3-posters/), our NMR fragment screening efforts against PrP at Broad have met with a remarkably low hit rate. We are not giving up the search for PrP binders, but it's worth acknowledging that it does appear to be a hard problem.
4. **How small is small**. Meanwhile, it is an open question how "small" a degradation-targeting chimera could ever be. Take for example the phthalimide-based PROTAC systems [[Winter 2015], [Lu 2015], [Nabet 2018]], which have perhaps gotten the most attention of any system here so far. This is kind of a best-case scenario, because phthalimide itself is tiny &mdash; just 274 Da, but by the time you add in a linker, you are up to 604 Da, and then you still need your POI binder. Thus, for example, the PROTAC dTAG-48 to degrade FKBP12 ends up being 1,208 Da [[Nabet 2018]]. That's four times the size of most [FDA-approved drugs for the central nervous system](/2013/10/04/properties-of-cns-drugs-vs-all-fda-approved-drugs/) (CNS), which cluster around 300 Da, and twice the size of the largest such drug (about 600 Da). It is an open question whether anyone will manage to make a degradation-targeting chimera molecule small enough to get into the brain, and for that matter, we don't even yet have any evidence as to whether the pharmacokinetics of these chimeric molecules can be successfully tuned even for robust delivery to peripheral tissues of interest.

Given all these limitations, a degradation-targeting chimera is not our fastest bet for developing a drug to lower PrP &mdash; thank heavens [antisense oligonucleotides](/2018/07/10/antisense-part-i-the-basics/) appear poised to get there much, much faster. Still, this is an exciting area of research and I intend to continue to keep an eye on this and think about how they could work for our disease.


[Sakamoto 2001]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11438690 "Sakamoto KM, Kim KB, Kumagai A, Mercurio F, Crews CM, Deshaies RJ. Protacs: chimeric molecules that target proteins to the Skp1-Cullin-F box complex for ubiquitination and degradation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jul 17;98(15):8554-9. Epub 2001 Jul 3. PubMed PMID: 11438690; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC37474."

[White 2003]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12621436 "White AR, Enever P, Tayebi M, Mushens R, Linehan J, Brandner S, Anstee D, Collinge J, Hawke S. Monoclonal antibodies inhibit prion replication and delay the development of prion disease. Nature. 2003 Mar 6;422(6927):80-3. PubMed PMID: 12621436."

[Holland 2012]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23150568 "Holland AJ, Fachinetti D, Han JS, Cleveland DW. Inducible, reversible system for the rapid and complete degradation of proteins in mammalian cells. Proc Natl  Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 4;109(49):E3350-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1216880109. Epub 2012 Nov 12. PubMed PMID: 23150568; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3523849."

[Wijtmans 2012]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22424612 "Wijtmans M, Maussang D, Sirci F, Scholten DJ, Canals M, Mujić-Delić A, Chong M, Chatalic KL, Custers H, Janssen E, de Graaf C, Smit MJ, de Esch IJ, Leurs R. Synthesis, modeling and functional activity of substituted styrene-amides as small-molecule CXCR7 agonists. Eur J Med Chem. 2012 May;51:184-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2012.02.041. Epub 2012 Feb 27. PubMed PMID: 22424612."

[Fan 2014]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24464042 "Fan X, Jin WY, Lu J, Wang J, Wang YT. Rapid and reversible knockdown of endogenous proteins by peptide-directed lysosomal degradation. Nat Neurosci. 2014 Mar;17(3):471-80. doi: 10.1038/nn.3637. Epub 2014 Jan 26. PubMed PMID: 24464042;  PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3937121."

[Winter 2015]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25999370 "Winter GE, Buckley DL, Paulk J, Roberts JM, Souza A, Dhe-Paganon S, Bradner JE. DRUG DEVELOPMENT. Phthalimide conjugation as a strategy for in vivo target protein degradation. Science. 2015 Jun 19;348(6241):1376-81. doi: 10.1126/science.aab1433. Epub 2015 May 21. PubMed PMID: 25999370."

[Lu 2015]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26051217 "Lu J, Qian Y, Altieri M, Dong H, Wang J, Raina K, Hines J, Winkler JD, Crew AP, Coleman K, Crews CM. Hijacking the E3 Ubiquitin Ligase Cereblon to Efficiently Target BRD4. Chem Biol. 2015 Jun 18;22(6):755-63. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2015.05.009. Epub 2015 Jun 4. PubMed PMID: 26051217; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4475452."

[Bondeson 2015]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26075522 "Bondeson DP, Mares A, Smith IE, Ko E, Campos S, Miah AH, Mulholland KE, Routly N, Buckley DL, Gustafson JL, Zinn N, Grandi P, Shimamura S, Bergamini G, Faelth-Savitski M, Bantscheff M, Cox C, Gordon DA, Willard RR, Flanagan JJ, Casillas LN, Votta BJ, den Besten W, Famm K, Kruidenier L, Carter PS, Harling JD, Churcher I, Crews CM. Catalytic in vivo protein knockdown by small-molecule PROTACs. Nat Chem Biol. 2015 Aug;11(8):611-7. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1858. Epub 2015 Jun 10. PubMed PMID: 26075522; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4629852."

[Gustafson 2015]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26083457 "Gustafson JL, Neklesa TK, Cox CS, Roth AG, Buckley DL, Tae HS, Sundberg TB, Stagg DB, Hines J, McDonnell DP, Norris JD, Crews CM. Small-Molecule-Mediated Degradation of the Androgen Receptor through Hydrophobic Tagging. Angew Chem Int  Ed Engl. 2015 Aug 10;54(33):9659-62. doi: 10.1002/anie.201503720. Epub 2015 Jun 17. PubMed PMID: 26083457; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4547777."

[Backus 2016]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27309814 "Backus KM, Correia BE, Lum KM, Forli S, Horning BD, González-Páez GE, Chatterjee S, Lanning BR, Teijaro JR, Olson AJ, Wolan DW, Cravatt BF. Proteome-wide covalent ligand discovery in native biological systems. Nature. 2016 Jun 23;534(7608):570-4. doi: 10.1038/nature18002. Epub 2016 Jun 15. PubMed PMID: 27309814; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4919207."

[Clift 2017]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29153837 "Clift D, McEwan WA, Labzin LI, Konieczny V, Mogessie B, James LC, Schuh M. A Method for the Acute and Rapid Degradation of Endogenous Proteins. Cell. 2017 Dec 14;171(7):1692-1706.e18. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.10.033. Epub 2017 Nov 16. PubMed PMID: 29153837; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5733393."

[Nabet 2018]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29581585 "Nabet B, Roberts JM, Buckley DL, Paulk J, Dastjerdi S, Yang A, Leggett AL, Erb MA, Lawlor MA, Souza A, Scott TG, Vittori S, Perry JA, Qi J, Winter GE, Wong KK,  Gray NS, Bradner JE. The dTAG system for immediate and target-specific protein degradation. Nat Chem Biol. 2018 May;14(5):431-441. doi: 10.1038/s41589-018-0021-8. Epub 2018 Mar 26. PubMed PMID: 29581585; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC6295913."

[Naito 2019]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31200857 "Naito M, Ohoka N, Shibata N. SNIPERs-Hijacking IAP activity to induce protein  degradation. Drug Discov Today Technol. 2019 Apr;31:35-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ddtec.2018.12.002. Epub 2019 Jan 14. Review. PubMed PMID: 31200857."

[Nalawansha 2019]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31263767 "Nalawansha DA, Paiva SL, Rafizadeh DN, Pettersson M, Qin L, Crews CM. Targeted Protein Internalization and Degradation by ENDosome TArgeting Chimeras (ENDTACs). ACS Cent Sci. 2019 Jun 26;5(6):1079-1084. doi: 10.1021/acscentsci.9b00224. Epub 2019 May 9. PubMed PMID: 31263767; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC6598169."

[Banik 2019]: https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv.7927061 "Banik S, Pedram K, Wisnovsky S, Riley N, Bertozzi C. Lysosome Targeting Chimeras (LYTACs) for the Degradation of Secreted and Membrane Proteins [Internet]. ChemRxiv; 2019 [cited 2019 Sep 9].. Available from: https://chemrxiv.org/articles/Lysosome_Targeting_Chimeras_LYTACs_for_the_Degradation_of_Secreted_and_Membrane_Proteins/7927061/1"

[Zhang 2019]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31209349 "Zhang X, Crowley VM, Wucherpfennig TG, Dix MM, Cravatt BF. Electrophilic PROTACs that degrade nuclear proteins by engaging DCAF16. Nat Chem Biol. 2019 Jul;15(7):737-746. doi: 10.1038/s41589-019-0279-5. Epub 2019 Jun 17. PubMed PMID: 31209349; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC6592777."


