---
layout: post
title:  "RNA therapeutic news roundup Q1 2021"
date:   2021-04-08 12:01:00
author: ericminikel
location: Cambridge, MA
thumb120: 
summary200: "Phase 4 trial of ASO after gene therapy for SMA; FDA N of 1 guidance; ligand-conjugated ASO in hereditary angioedema; Wave kills two Huntington's disease leads; atlas of ASO brain activity."
---

Just like back in [January](/2021/01/11/rna-therapeutic-news-roundup-2020/), I find that I've been accumulating a short list of interesting news updates from RNA therapeutics that collectively seem worth sharing but no individual one of which has risen to the level of being its own blog post. Of course, the biggest news story from the past few months was the [halting of tominersen trials](/2021/03/24/huntingtons-aso-trial-halted/) in Huntington's disease, but as I noted in that post, we don't yet know anything about what happened in that trial so there isn't much to say. In the meantime, here are five recent developments I found interesting.

### nusinersen vs. onasemnogene

In January, Biogen [announced](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/biogen-announces-first-patient-treated-123000141.html) that it had dosed the first patient in a new Phase 4 trial ([NCT04488133](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04488133)) of nusinersen, the Ionis/Biogen ASO for spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), in patients who had already received onasemnogene abeparvovec, Novartis/AveXis gene therapy for SMA. The open-label trial will recruit children who still have "potential for additional clinical improvement" despite receiving the one-time gene therapy shot. In other words, if the gene therapy didn't cure you, can the ASO still help?

The trial will last two years, and so there are no data yet, and there won't be for a long time. But this news story caught my eye because the very existence of this trial is significant: it will evaluate the efficacy of layering one rare disease therapy on top of another. SMA now has three approved drugs: an ASO, and a gene therapy, and a small molecule (risdiplam). While SMA is not cured, it's a shining example for any untreatable rare disease hoping to have therapeutic options become available. The results of this new trial could help write the future in SMA: when a rare disease has more than one approved drug, can patients get to benefit from all of them, or do they have to choose just one?

Consider the case of Gaucher disease, which is caused by partial or total loss of function of the gene _GBA_, encoding &beta;-glucocerebrosidase. Gaucher was the indication for the first-ever enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), imiglucerase, approved way back in 1994. Fast forward to today, there are five approved drugs for Gaucher disease. Imiglucerase and two other nearly identical ERTs (velaglucerase alfa and taliglucerase alfa) all supply the working &beta;-glucocerebrosidase enzyme, while two small-molecule substrate reduction therapies (SRTs; miglustat and eliglustat) inhibit glucosylceramide synthase (_UGCG_), the enzyme upstream of the mutated enzyme in Gaucher. One of those SRTs, miglustat, even has [generic competition](https://www.hcplive.com/view/generic-miglustat-approved) since 2018. Gaucher disease is far from cured &mdash; in fact, none of these drugs addresses the neurological manifestations of the more severe subtypes &mdash; but to those of us working on untreatable diseases, having five drugs with two mechanisms of action seems like a lot to aspire to! Here's the catch: all of these therapies [cost](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK534700/table/pe.app1.table12a/) hundreds of thousands of dollars, and it's either/or &mdash; patients don't generally take both an ERT and SRT. The prior authorization forms that insurers ask doctors to fill out in order to prescribe SRTs [sometimes](https://www.healthnet.com/static/general/unprotected/html/national/pa_guidelines/zavesca_natl.html) list "Failure or clinically significant adverse effects to enzyme replacement therapy" as a prerequisite, and miglustat's [FDA label](https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2014/021348s010lbl.pdf) even specifies it is only for patients "for whom enzyme replacement therapy is not a therapeutic option". Why? It all comes down to the available evidence from clinical trials. In this case, trials comparing imiglucerase to either miglustat ([NCT00319046](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00319046)) or eliglustat ([NCT00943111](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00943111)), as monotherapies, showed non-inferiority [[Cox 2012], [Cox 2015]], but a trial of SRT/ERT combination therapy has not yet read out ([NCT03485677](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03485677)). If there's no clinical evidence to suggest that combination therapy is better than monotherapy, and the drugs cost a lot, then of course insurers don't want to pay for both.

In prion disease, I often hear people say that one drug is unlikely to be a cure, or a completely effective chronic treatment, and we're likely to need drug cocktails. It's easy to say in the abstract, but the Gaucher story is a good reminder that getting there in reality is a struggle. The best therapy might be A, B, or A and B. Which regimen patients actually take will be determined by clinical evidence, and that means comparative trials may go on long after a drug is approved. While it's a long road, it's heartening to see that in SMA, at least, there is appetite to go down this road. 

### FDA "N of 1" guidance

Milasen, an ASO designed to restore proper splicing for a single patient's _MFSD8_ mutation, has become a heralded example of an "N of 1" therapy [[Kim & Hu 2019]]. A growing number of activated patients and families are striving to design analogous therapies for their own genetic mutations. These are likely to be developed on highly accelerated timelines, with relatively limited opportunity for rigorous human data collection. This creates a host of potentially rather difficult challenges for regulators tasked with considering the risk and benefit to patients [[Woodcock & Marks 2019]]. 

Early this year, FDA released a [draft guidance](https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/ind-submissions-individualized-antisense-oligonucleotide-drug-products-administrative-and-procedural) on N of 1 therapies. The guidance only addresses Investigational New Drug (IND) submissions &mdash; permission to begin human dosing. IND is likely the key or only stage of interest for sponsors and advocates. Presumably, most N of 1 therapies won't have a need for marketing approval, nor any opportunity to generate the kind of clinical data that could support a marketing application. In the case of milasen, the maintenance dose was 42 mg every 3 months, and the sole manufacturing run yielded 18 grams of compound &mdash; more than a lifetime supply for this one patient. Families, and physicians, entering into an N of 1 study may expect to simply remain in a "treatment IND" status indefinitely. 

What data are required to get to IND? The guidance, above all, encourages early interaction with FDA, making clear that there still is no one-size-fits-all formula for N of 1. Take toxicology for instance. Milasen underwent just 74 days of preclinical toxicology in a single species, rats. [Guidance](https://www.fda.gov/media/71542/download) for standard drug development pathways would require two species, one of which must be non-rodent, to be dosed for 6-9 months or, at minimum, however long the trial is slated to last. Will a single-species, 2.5-month barebones tox package become standard in N of 1? The new guidance describes formats for submitting nonclinical data, but does not spell out the minimum type and amount of data required. Presumably, it all depends. Regulators have shown remarkable flexibility so far in accommodating unconventional development paths for "N of 1" therapies, but boiling that flexibility down to a formula without regards to each program's particulars has got to be an awfully big challenge. _Update: On April 26, 2021, FDA released a [draft guidance on nonclinical studies for N of 1 therapies](https://www.fda.gov/media/147876/download) which does answer some of these questions in greater detail: for example, it allows for a single species, 3-month toxicology package, only 2 weeks of which need be completed prior to the first human dose._

The new guidance received [comments](https://www.regulations.gov/document/FDA-2020-D-2199-0001/comment) from n-Lorem, NORD, and some of the other parties you'd expect. It will be interesting to see how the final guidance evolves. But ultimately, it's early days. My guess is it will take several more examples of N of 1 therapies to help work out what the standards and expectations will be.

### ligand-conjugated ASO success in hereditary angioedema

In March, Ionis [announced](https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/ionis-reports-positive-topline-phase-2-study-results-of-its-novel-antisense-treatment-for-hereditary-angioedema-301257232.html) a remarkable success in its Phase 2 trial of an ASO hereditary angioedema (HAE). HAE is caused by loss of function of the gene _SERPING1_, which encodes a protein called C1-INH or C1-inhibitor. Without it, the [contact system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contact_activation_system) goes into overdrive, causing painful and life-threatening swelling attacks. The ASO IONIS-PKK-LRx targets the gene _KLKB1_, encoding the protein prekallikrein (PKK), to rein in the contact system. 

Ionis had previously published promising preclinical data from this program [[Ferrone 2019]] as well as a compassionate use pilot study in two patients [[Cohn 2020]]. But the new press release caught my eye for the sheer magnitude of therapeutic benefit: a 97% reduction in swelling attacks from week 5 onward, with 92% of drug-treated participants having zero attacks.

In contrast to many of the other indications Ionis works on, there are actually several existing treatment options for HAE, including infusions of recombinant or plasma-derived C1-INH, and both monoclonal antibody and small molecule inhibitors of PKK [[Cohn 2020]]. But while the ASO may not be first-in-class, it has a potential to be best-in-class. The antibody, lanadelumab, reduced attacks by 87% [[Banerji 2018]], and the small molecule, berotralstat, reduced them by only about half [[Ohsawa 2020]]. 

This success is a validation of Ionis's ligand-conjugated antisense (LICA) technology. This ASO is conjugated to GalNAc<sub>3</sub> to promote liver uptake. last year's compassionate use study had compared this ligand-conjugated version of the drug against an unconjugated version, and found that the LICA achieved comparable efficacy at an order of magnitude lower dose (80 mg every 3 weeks, versus up to 400 mg weekly) [[Cohn 2020]]. This mirrors a recent study in transthyretin amyloidosis which found that the ligand-conjugated version of Ionis's approved drug for _TTR_, inotersen, was 30- to 50-fold more potent than the original drug [[Viney 2021]]. As of today, liver seems to be the main target for LICA, but a recent review discusses research into other peripheral tissues as well [[Roberts 2020]]. It remains to be seen whether LICA will eventually prove relevant to brain diseases.

### Wave kills two Huntington's disease leads

Not long after Ionis's _HTT_ ASO, tominersen, got halted in Phase 3, competitor Wave [dropped](https://www.fiercebiotech.com/biotech/wave-culls-leading-huntingdon-meds-as-shares-go-under-after-rival-roche-hit-by-similar-fate) two of its Huntington's disease leads as well. Wave has been developing stereochemically pure ASOs on the hypothesis that these might be able to achieve greater potency, tolerability, or allele specificity than the stereorandom ASOs that Ionis and most other competitors use. As explained by [HDBuzz](https://en.hdbuzz.net/301), Wave's candidates in Huntington's disease were all intended to be allele-specific, targeting only mutant huntingtin.

Things already weren't looking good for this program. The [first trial readout](https://ir.wavelifesciences.com/news-releases/news-release-details/wave-life-sciences-announces-topline-data-and-addition-higher) in 2019 saw only a 12.4% reduction of the target pharmacodynamic biomarker: mutant huntingtin in CSF. (For comparison, tominersen lowered mutant huntingtin by 40% in Phase I [[Tabrizi 2019]]). Wave responded by adding a higher (32 mg) dose arm in the hopes of seeing deeper target engagement. But according to Wave's [press release](https://ir.wavelifesciences.com/news-releases/news-release-details/wave-life-sciences-provides-update-phase-1b2a-precision-hd), even at that 32 mg dose, the two HD drug candidates reduced mutant huntingtin by only 9.9 to 11.6%, a result that was not significantly different from placebo. Wave hasn't totally divested from Huntington's, and says they plan to launch a trial of a a third candidate, WVE-003, in 2021.

Wave has published data on the performance of other stereopure ASOs in the liver [[Iwamoto 2017]] and more recently in the retina [[Byrne 2021]], but to my knowledge, they haven't published any preclinical data for the Huntington's disease program &mdash; all I was able to find was a conference abstract [[Dale 2020]]. So we don't really have any priors on which to predict whether the doses explored in this Phase I trial should or should not have acheived better target engagement. The only CNS indication for which I've seen any published preclinical data from Wave is the recent paper on _C9orf72_ [[Liu 2021]]. In that paper, they target a splice junction in order to specifically knock down the transcript isoform that is more commonly seen in patients with the pathogenic hexanucleotide repeat expansion &mdash; so they achieve some allele specificity without actually targeting the mutation. Analogously, their Huntington's disease leads weren't actually targeted at the CAG repeat expansion that causes Huntington's disease, but rather at benign SNPs within _HTT_, with the strategy of pre-screening patients to identify those for whom the repeat expansion was in _cis_ with the targeted SNP. Overall, it remains to be seen whether stereopure ASOs can achieve properties in the brain that stereorandom ASOs cannot.

### atlas of ASOs in the brain

In January, Ionis published a long-awaited paper with a large bolus of data on the distribution and activity of ASOs in the brain [[Jafar-Nejad & Powers 2021]]. If you follow ASOs at conferences, you've probably already been seeing data from this paper for a couple of years now.

The most common concern we hear about ASOs for the CNS, especially from neurologists, is whether they have sufficient distribution to all parts of the brain. Do they really reach deep brain structures or is drug activity limited to the cortex and spinal cord? Of course, the ultimate answer to this question will have to come from humans &mdash; efficacy in diseases with deep brain structure involvement, and autopsy data showing drug distribution and target engagement. But human data are slow to accumulate. In the meantime, the new paper does probably the best job you could ask for of using animal data to try to answer this question. As in previous studies of ASOs in the periphery [[Hung 2013]], Ionis uses the ubiquitously expressed non-coding RNA _Malat1_ as a model target. They examine the accumulation, potency, and distribution of a potent _Malat1_ ASO in mice, rats, and monkeys. In [Figure 5](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7826274/figure/F5/?report=objectonly), they show that across a battery of 35 different brain regions in cynomolgus macaques, the ASO lowers the target to anywhere from ~10% to 75% of its normal levels. The single least-reached region is putamen, with about 75% residual _Malat1_, followed by globus pallidus at about 60%. Even in caudate, thalamus, and deep cerebellar nuclei, the ASO lowers its target to about 50% of normal levels. In the best-reached regions, including virtually all parts of cortex, the target is lowered to about 10% of normal levels. So, while ASO distribution may not be equal, some level of target engagement is achieved throughout the brain in monkeys. Non-human primate data are a lot more convincing than just rodent data in this regard, but a caveat, of course, is that even an adult cynomolgus monkey brain still weighs in at only about 74 g [[Pardo 2012]], versus ~1,300 g for humans [[Svennerholm 1997]].

The paper also models (both in the monkeys and across mouse and rat models) the relationship between drug concentration and drug activity. Long story short, ASO concentration is a good proxy for target engagement &mdash; the reason why there is not much knockdown in the monkey putamen is because there is not much drug there. Finally, there are some limited cell type distribution data, showing that the ASO is active across multiple cell types in the brain: neurons, oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, and microglia.

All told, while we will continue to watch new human data roll in, this atlas of ASO activity provides a good foundation on which to believe that ASOs are a relevant modality for a whole-brain disease like prion disease.

[Svennerholm 1997]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9341935/ "Svennerholm L, Boström K, Jungbjer B. Changes in weight and compositions of major membrane components of human brain during the span of adult human life of Swedes. Acta Neuropathol. 1997 Oct;94(4):345-52. doi: 10.1007/s004010050717. PMID: 9341935."

[Pardo 2012]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22317925/ "Pardo ID, Garman RH, Weber K, Bobrowski WF, Hardisty JF, Morton D. Technical guide for nervous system sampling of the cynomolgus monkey for general toxicity studies. Toxicol Pathol. 2012 Jun;40(4):624-36. doi: 10.1177/0192623311436180. Epub 2012 Feb 7. PMID: 22317925. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/0192623311436180"

[Cox 2012]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23270487/ "Cox TM, Amato D, Hollak CE, Luzy C, Silkey M, Giorgino R, Steiner RD; Miglustat Maintenance Study Group. Evaluation of miglustat as maintenance therapy after enzyme therapy in adults with stable type 1 Gaucher disease: a prospective, open-label non-inferiority study. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012 Dec 27;7:102. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-102. PMID: 23270487; PMCID: PMC3552937."

[Hung 2013]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24161045/ "Hung G, Xiao X, Peralta R, Bhattacharjee G, Murray S, Norris D, Guo S, Monia BP. Characterization of target mRNA reduction through in situ RNA hybridization in multiple organ systems following systemic antisense treatment in animals. Nucleic Acid Ther. 2013 Dec;23(6):369-78. doi: 10.1089/nat.2013.0443. Epub 2013 Oct 26. Erratum in: Nucleic Acid Ther. 2014 Apr;24(2):178. PMID: 24161045."

[Cox 2015]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25819691/ "Cox TM, Drelichman G, Cravo R, Balwani M, Burrow TA, Martins AM, Lukina E, Rosenbloom B, Ross L, Angell J, Puga AC. Eliglustat compared with imiglucerase in patients with Gaucher's disease type 1 stabilised on enzyme replacement therapy: a phase 3, randomised, open-label, non-inferiority trial. Lancet. 2015 Jun 13;385(9985):2355-62. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61841-9. Epub 2015 Mar 26. Erratum in: Lancet. 2015 Jun 13;385(9985):2354. PMID: 25819691."

[Iwamoto 2017]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28829437/ "Iwamoto N, Butler DCD, Svrzikapa N, Mohapatra S, Zlatev I, Sah DWY, Meena, Standley SM, Lu G, Apponi LH, Frank-Kamenetsky M, Zhang JJ, Vargeese C, Verdine GL. Control of phosphorothioate stereochemistry substantially increases the efficacy of antisense oligonucleotides. Nat Biotechnol. 2017 Sep;35(9):845-851. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3948. Epub 2017 Aug 21. PMID: 28829437."

[Banerji 2018]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30480729/ "Banerji A, Riedl MA, Bernstein JA, Cicardi M, Longhurst HJ, Zuraw BL, Busse PJ, Anderson J, Magerl M, Martinez-Saguer I, Davis-Lorton M, Zanichelli A, Li HH, Craig T, Jacobs J, Johnston DT, Shapiro R, Yang WH, Lumry WR, Manning ME, Schwartz LB, Shennak M, Soteres D, Zaragoza-Urdaz RH, Gierer S, Smith AM, Tachdjian R, Wedner HJ, Hebert J, Rehman SM, Staubach P, Schranz J, Baptista J, Nothaft W, Maurer M; HELP Investigators. Effect of Lanadelumab Compared With Placebo on Prevention of Hereditary Angioedema Attacks: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2018 Nov 27;320(20):2108-2121. doi: 10.1001/jama.2018.16773. Erratum in: JAMA. 2019 Apr 23;321(16):1636. PMID: 30480729; PMCID: PMC6583584."

[Kim & Hu 2019]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31597037/ "Kim J, Hu C, Moufawad El Achkar C, Black LE, Douville J, Larson A, Pendergast MK, Goldkind SF, Lee EA, Kuniholm A, Soucy A, Vaze J, Belur NR, Fredriksen K, Stojkovska I, Tsytsykova A, Armant M, DiDonato RL, Choi J, Cornelissen L, Pereira LM, Augustine EF, Genetti CA, Dies K, Barton B, Williams L, Goodlett BD, Riley BL, Pasternak A, Berry ER, Pflock KA, Chu S, Reed C, Tyndall K, Agrawal PB, Beggs AH, Grant PE, Urion DK, Snyder RO, Waisbren SE, Poduri A, Park PJ, Patterson A, Biffi A, Mazzulli JR, Bodamer O, Berde CB, Yu TW. Patient-Customized Oligonucleotide Therapy for a Rare Genetic Disease. N Engl J Med. 2019 Oct 24;381(17):1644-1652. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1813279. Epub 2019 Oct 9. PMID: 31597037; PMCID: PMC6961983."

[Woodcock & Marks 2019]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31597016/ "Woodcock J, Marks P. Drug Regulation in the Era of Individualized Therapies. N Engl J Med. 2019 Oct 24;381(17):1678-1680. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1911295. Epub 2019 Oct 9. PMID: 31597016."

[Ferrone 2019]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30817230/ "Ferrone JD, Bhattacharjee G, Revenko AS, Zanardi TA, Warren MS, Derosier FJ, Viney NJ, Pham NC, Kaeser GE, Baker BF, Schneider E, Hughes SG, Monia BP, MacLeod AR. IONIS-PKKRx a Novel Antisense Inhibitor of Prekallikrein and Bradykinin Production. Nucleic Acid Ther. 2019 Apr;29(2):82-91. doi: 10.1089/nat.2018.0754. Epub 2019 Feb 28. PMID: 30817230; PMCID: PMC6461157."

[Tabrizi 2019]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31059641/ "Tabrizi SJ, Leavitt BR, Landwehrmeyer GB, Wild EJ, Saft C, Barker RA, Blair NF, Craufurd D, Priller J, Rickards H, Rosser A, Kordasiewicz HB, Czech C, Swayze EE, Norris DA, Baumann T, Gerlach I, Schobel SA, Paz E, Smith AV, Bennett CF, Lane RM; Phase 1–2a IONIS-HTTRx Study Site Teams. Targeting Huntingtin Expression in Patients with Huntington's Disease. N Engl J Med. 2019 Jun 13;380(24):2307-2316. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1900907. Epub 2019 May 6. Erratum in: N Engl J Med. 2019 Oct 3;381(14):1398. PMID: 31059641."

[Cohn 2020]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32877578/ "Cohn DM, Viney NJ, Fijen LM, Schneider E, Alexander VJ, Xia S, Kaeser GE, Nanavati C, Baker BF, Geary RS, Levi M, Meijers JCM, Stroes ESG. Antisense Inhibition of Prekallikrein to Control Hereditary Angioedema. N Engl J Med. 2020 Sep 24;383(13):1242-1247. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1915035. Epub 2020 Sep 2. PMID: 32877578."

[Ohsawa 2020]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33247955/ "Ohsawa I, Honda D, Suzuki Y, Fukuda T, Kohga K, Morita E, Moriwaki S, Ishikawa O, Sasaki Y, Tago M, Chittick G, Cornpropst M, Murray SC, Dobo SM, Nagy E, Van Dyke S, Reese L, Best JM, Iocca H, Collis P, Sheridan WP, Hide M. Oral berotralstat for the prophylaxis of hereditary angioedema attacks in patients in Japan: A phase 3 randomized trial. Allergy. 2020 Nov 28. doi: 10.1111/all.14670. Epub ahead of print. PMID: 33247955."

[Dale 2020]: https://n.neurology.org/content/94/15_Supplement/4703.abstract "Dale E, Frank-Kamenetsky M, Taborn K, Aklilu K, Liu Y, Berkovitch S, Brown J, Kandasamy P, Kumarasamy J, Mathieu S, Iwamoto N, Yin Y, Yang H, Standley S, Favaloro F, Longo K, Byrne M, Vargeese C. Stereopure Oligonucleotides for the Selective Silencing of Mutant Huntingtin (4703). Neurology. 2020 Apr 14;94(15 Supplement):4703."

[Roberts 2020]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32782413/ "Roberts TC, Langer R, Wood MJA. Advances in oligonucleotide drug delivery. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2020 Oct;19(10):673-694. doi: 10.1038/s41573-020-0075-7. Epub 2020 Aug 11. PMID: 32782413; PMCID: PMC7419031."

[Viney 2021]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33283485/ "Viney NJ, Guo S, Tai LJ, Baker BF, Aghajan M, Jung SW, Yu RZ, Booten S, Murray H, Machemer T, Burel S, Murray S, Buchele G, Tsimikas S, Schneider E, Geary RS, Benson MD, Monia BP. Ligand conjugated antisense oligonucleotide for the treatment of transthyretin amyloidosis: preclinical and phase 1 data. ESC Heart Fail. 2021 Feb;8(1):652-661. doi: 10.1002/ehf2.13154. Epub 2020 Dec 7. PMID: 33283485; PMCID: PMC7835591."

[Byrne 2021]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33510962/ "Byrne M, Vathipadiekal V, Apponi L, Iwamoto N, Kandasamy P, Longo K, Liu F, Looby R, Norwood L, Shah A, Shelke JD, Shivalila C, Yang H, Yin Y, Guo L, Bowman K, Vargeese C. Stereochemistry Enhances Potency, Efficacy, and Durability of Malat1 Antisense Oligonucleotides In Vitro and In Vivo in Multiple Species. Transl Vis Sci Technol. 2021 Jan 12;10(1):23. doi: 10.1167/tvst.10.1.23. PMID: 33510962; PMCID: PMC7804567."

[Liu 2021]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33558503/ "Liu Y, Dodart JC, Tran H, Berkovitch S, Braun M, Byrne M, Durbin AF, Hu XS, Iwamoto N, Jang HG, Kandasamy P, Liu F, Longo K, Ruschel J, Shelke J, Yang H, Yin Y, Donner A, Zhong Z, Vargeese C, Brown RH Jr. Variant-selective stereopure oligonucleotides protect against pathologies associated with C9orf72-repeat expansion in preclinical models. Nat Commun. 2021 Feb 8;12(1):847. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-21112-8. PMID: 33558503; PMCID: PMC7870851."

[Jafar-Nejad & Powers 2021]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33367834/ "Jafar-Nejad P, Powers B, Soriano A, Zhao H, Norris DA, Matson J, DeBrosse-Serra B, Watson J, Narayanan P, Chun SJ, Mazur C, Kordasiewicz H, Swayze EE, Rigo F. The atlas of RNase H antisense oligonucleotide distribution and activity in the CNS of rodents and non-human primates following central administration. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Jan 25;49(2):657-673. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1235. PMID: 33367834; PMCID: PMC7826274."



